# The Skill That Holds Back (Most) Data Scientists
#### 7 communication tips that made me a better data scientist

When starting in data science, I was hyper-focused on learning Python, Machine
Learning, Statistics, etc. While these are necessary, there is another skill
that most tend to overlook at their peril— _communication_. In this article, I
discuss why data scientists must be effective communicators and share 7 tips
that have helped me improve this skill set.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*3AdJ5HmlB8aYyPok)Photo by
[Mitchel Lensink](https://unsplash.com/@lensinkmitchel?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com?utm_source=medium&utm_medium=referral)

* * *

Back in grad school, the Physics department hosted weekly _colloquia_ , where
guest speakers would come to present their research. The typical story was
that most of the audience understood the first slide (title) and maybe the
second (agenda) but got lost after that.

**The** **same happens in data science** when non-technical stakeholders sit
through presentations from (most) data scientists. “ _It made sense until you
started talking about train-test splits and AUCs_ ,” they might say.

While this might seem like an unavoidable reality of data science, I’ve
learned that explaining these topics more effectively is not only possible but
**essential for advancing a data science career**.

Here, I share the key communication tips I’ve used to get promoted, land
clients, and explain AI to [100k+ people](https://www.youtube.com/@ShawhinTalebi).

* * *

### **Why Communication Matters**

The importance of communication may shock some and be met with some
resistance. So, allow me to explain this a little more.

Data scientists don’t typically solve their problems; rather, they solve other
people’s problems (i.e., stakeholders). **This is how data scientists generate
value** in a business context.

Therefore, the amount of value a data scientist provides is directly
proportional to how effectively they can collaborate with their non-technical
stakeholders. To put it plainly, if stakeholders don’t understand and adopt
your solution, **it provides zero value**.

### **You can learn this**

Some might think that communication is one of those skills you either have or
don’t have. This, of course, is false. Communication (like any other skill)
**can and must be developed through practice**.

For instance, I started this journey as an overly technical physics grad
student, but after 5 years of actively giving presentations, writing articles,
making YouTube videos, hosting events, interviewing entrepreneurs, and doing
technical consultations, I now get praised (and paid) for my communication
skills. **If I can do it, you can too**.

### **7 Communication Tips for Data Scientists**

The following are the communication tips I use most often. Although I’m
focusing on technical presentations here, these tips broadly apply to
conversations, writing, and beyond.

An upside of developing this skill as a data scientist is that the bar is so
low that even **becoming a decent communicator** can put you ahead of most of
your peers (I am living proof of that).

### **Tip 1: Use Stories**

The most powerful way to communicate is through storytelling. Our brains are
wired for stories [1]. So, the more you can use them, the better.

When I say “story,” you might think of the textbook definition, i.e., _an
account of imaginary or real people and events_ [2]. However, I mean it in a
broader sense, which I picked up from the book _The Storyteller's Secret_ [1].

There, the author defines a **story** as **any 3-part narrative**. Some
examples of this are:

  * Status quo. Problem. Solution.
  * What? Why? How?
  * What? So what? What now?

Here’s what the first example above looks like in action.

> AI has taken the business world by storm (status quo). While its potential
> is clear, translating it into specific value-generating business
> applications remains a challenge (problem). Here I discuss 5 AI success
> stories to help guide its development in your business (solution).

### **Tip 2: Use Examples**

Data science is full of abstract ideas that bear little resemblance to our
daily lives (e.g., features, overfitting, curse of dimensionality). A powerful
way to **make these abstract ideas relatable is through specific examples**.

Let’s demonstrate the power of examples by example. Suppose a stakeholder asks
you, _“What’s a feature?”_

Your instinct might be to give a definition, i.e., _“Features are what we use
to make predictions.”_ However, this is a pretty vague statement.

A simple way to clarify this is by following up the general definition with a
specific example like, _“For example, the features in our customer churn are
Account Age and Number of Logins in Past 90 Days.”_

### **Tip 3: Use Analogies**

Although examples are powerful, sometimes they don’t get the job done. This is
where analogies come in. **Analogies** are powerful because they **map the
familiar to the unfamiliar**.

For instance, the other day, I found myself explaining _Mechanistic
Interpretability_ to a non-technical client. This is a big, scary term (even
for data scientists), so here’s how I explained it.

> Modern AIs like ChatGPT are powerful, but we don’t really know how they work
> under the hood. The idea with Mechanistic Interpretability is to look under
> the hood to find out what different parts of the model do.

By comparing an LLM (unfamiliar) to a car engine (familiar), this abstract
concept becomes much more digestible.

### **Tip 4: Numbered Lists**

In a sea of ideas and words, numbers tend to stand out. This makes them an
effective way to convey information.

For example, I’m using this technique to structure the 7 communication tips in
this article. However, this goes beyond the typical internet listicle you
might see.

Another way to use numbered lists is when **making multiple points in the flow
of communication**. For example, I want to make 2 points here: 1) numbers
stand out to us, and 2) they provide a clear way to structure information.

The reason (IMO) this works so well is becuase numbers like 1, 2, 3, etc., are
such basic and familiar concepts that they require little cognitive effort to
process.

### **Tip 5: Less is More**

> “I didn’t have time to write a short letter, so I wrote a long one instead.”
> — Mark Twain

This is the most fundamental principle of effective communication. Your
audience only has a **finite amount of attention** to give you. Therefore, as
communicators, we need to be economical when spending our audience’s
attention.

While you might think fewer words mean less time, the opposite is often true.
Distilling ideas down to the most essential takes many iterations.

This can mean cutting down the number of slides in a presentation, the number
of elements on each slide, and even the number of characters used in the
title.

Here are some heuristics I use in a business context:

  * Keep talks 20 min or less (~10 slides or less)
  * Don’t have more than 3–5 elements per slide
  * Make bullet points as short as possible (down to the character)

### **Tip 6: Show Don’t Tell**

A corollary of less is more is **pictures over words**. It takes more from our
brains to process text than images, so conveying ideas through pictures is an
unreasonably effective way to preserve people’s limited attention while still
making the point.

Here is the fine-tuning analogy from Tip 3, compared to a visual
representation of the same idea.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*PAIUO24nfdxZqPPsWJdfLw.png)Fine-
tuning analogy in words vs images. Image by author.

This highlights the power of data visualizations. Although this topic deserves
a dedicated article, it shares the foundational principle of _less is more_.

### **Tip 7: Slow Down**

This final tip was a game-changer for me. Before, I tended to rush through
presentations. This was likely a result of nerves and just trying to get it
over with. Eventually, however, I realized the **nerves would naturally
subside by slowing down my pace and using a calmer tone**.

Slowing down has the added benefit of improving the audience’s experience. A
rush talk can feel like getting blasted by a firehouse, while a well-paced one
is like a soothing stream. Consequently, a short, rushed talk is more painful
than a long, well-paced one.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*G-2Ypyjra2etJAIlFYCJVQ.png)A
rushed talk vs a well-paced one. Image by author.

### **Bonus: Know Thy Audience**

While the tips above can yield quick improvements to one’s communication,
their impact will be limited if the communication is not tailored to the
audience. This highlights the importance of empathy.

**Empathy** means **seeing things from someone else’s perspective**. It is
essential for effective communication because it provides the context for
framing all aspects of your presentation.

The more you can put yourself in the audience’s shoes, the more effectively
you can speak to what they care about and understand.

### **Conclusion**

Most data scientists' limiting factor is not their technical skills but their
ability to communicate effectively. Developing this skill is one of the best
ways for data science professionals to advance their careers and make a
greater impact.

Here, I shared 7 tips that have been most helpful to me in improving my
communication. If you have tips that have helped you, drop them in the
comments :)